# Ambulance-TransportationMode
R and SAS code for generating graphics showing which patient illnesses are most associated with ambulances travelling with lights and sirens

Data used in this analysis was collected from Patient Care Records provided by Bozeman AMR.  A PCR is filled out as part of standard protocol for every patient transport, and details specific information pertaining to patient illness and medic responsive activities while under the care of an EMS worker.  The record set used for analysis includes all PCRs submitted by AMR between July 2, 2005 and July 1, 2010.  This data set consists of 13,253 individual calls, and the variables, descriptions, and example data entry values from the PCRs are listed below in Table 1.

Of the 13,253 PCRs provided by, the only records included in this analysis were those with an outcome of “Transported,” which excluded 3,802 records.  Excluded patient outcomes include “Patient Refused AMA (2345 records excluded),” “Cancelled FD/PD (702),” “Cancelled ENR (386),” “Dead On Arrival (97),” “No Patient Found (84),” “No Treatment Req’d (53),” “Lift Assist (48),” “Inter-Facility (29),” “Treated and Pronounced (26),” “Police Custody (17),” “Treat/No Trans. (14),” and “Helicopter (1),”
  
This code identifies significant predictors toward operating in emergency mode, which designates an immediate request for assistance while using lights and sirens.  Although there are three types of transportation mode (scheduled, urgent, and emergency), this study treats transportation mode as a binary variable (emergency | non-emergency) where both scheduled and urgent calls are included in a “non-emergency” transportation mode.

The reduced data set includes 9,451 individual transportations.  Of these transports, 9,405 (99.50 percent) had no change in transportation mode between leaving the scene and arriving at the destination, 35 (0.37 percent) initiated emergency mode during the transport, and 11 (0.13 percent) began in emergency mode but reduced the transportation mode to non-emergency during the transport.  To account for the change in transportation status during a transport, the response variable on the PCRs used in this analysis was “Transportation Mode: From Scene (Last).”
